In this week’s A-Typical interview we feature South African comedian Mark Banks. In over 25 years of comedy, Banks boasts at least one new one-man show each year, of which he writes and performs all the material himself. Since his acclaimed inception to comedy, Banks has continuously played to packed houses nationwide. He was one of the cast members of  the Bafunny Bafunny tour, who performed at the prestigious Royal Albert Hall in London in May 2010. His latest show “Mark Banks On Ice” is currently on show at the Pieter Toerien Theatre at Montecasino. EFF president Julius Malema is coming over to your house for lunch. What meal do you serve him ? And what topic of discussion do you have with him? Whoever comes to my house for lunch gets the same menu. Potato and leek soup. Lamb chops and tomato and onion and cheese braaied jaffle and ice cream. Topics of discussion would be:- The Roswell Incident (UFO crash), travel, the after life and contact therewith. . . unknown facts about the Titanic. Snakes. These are my topics for all people, so Julius would be no exception. I'm told he has a great sense of humour. If you had the opportunity to be the President of South Africa for one month.. what would you first order of business be? Kibbutz style work centres throughout the country where people would learn work skills, grow essential vegetables, make clothes and whatever else the country needed. Fire all of parliament and begin from the beginning. Cheryl Carolus would be deputy. Tell us a little bit about your most embarrassing moment on stage so far? Locking myself in a fridge I had climbed into and closing the door. . . nobody knew I was in it! If you could team up with any comedian in the world to do a world tour.. which comedian would you choose and which country would you first visit? One of South Africa's funniest comedians Tseietsi. . . I would start where he comes from Limpopo. . .and then probably Russia. What is the funniest joke you know by heart? I bought a packet of Iced Zoo biscuits. On the outside of the packet it said DO NOT EAT IF SEAL IS BROKEN. I opened the packet and the elephant was broken. What kind of secret society would you like to start? One in which there are no comedians or people trying to be funny. . .they are exhausting. What is the most disturbing thing you've seen on the internet lately? A woman chained to a chair in a hospital by hospital staff What would the world be like if it was filled with male and female copies of you? Terrifying. . .i don't know what i'm going to do or say next! What would you want people to write in your obituary and why? He died many times!!!! This was his last! ( if you are not doing very well on stage comedy wise it's called dying) What's the one thing you need to have in your fridge at any given time Milk. The Saturday Star